.TH "DOCONCE" 1

.SH NAME
doconce - run a Doconce command

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B doconce
command
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBdoconce\fR script takes a command and runs a corresponding
utility. The available commands are listed below. Running the script
without arguments prints a list of the available commands.

.TP
\fBformat\fR
Transform a Doconce document to a desired format. Proceeding argument:
one of the format names (latex, html, rst, sphinx, plain, etc.).

.TP
\fBsubst\fR
Substitute a regular expression by another regular expression in a
series of files:

doconce subst [\-s \-m \-x \-\-restore] regex-pattern regex-replacement file1 file2 ...

(\-s is the re.DOTALL modifier, \-m is the re.MULTILINE modifier, \-x is
the re.VERBOSE modifier, \-\-restore copies backup files back again)

.TP
\fBreplace\fR
Replace a text by another text in a series of files.

doconce replace from-text to-text file1 file2 ...

.TP
\fBinsertdocstr\fR
Search for Python files having a preprocess #include statement that
includes a Doconce document for documentation in a doc string.

.TP
\fBold2new_format\fR
Updates documents from the old Doconce format to the new (version 0.3
and later).

.TP
\fBgwiki_figsubst\fR
Utility for inserting the correct URL to images in a gwiki document. Takes
two additional arguments: the .gwiki file and the URL of the directory
where the figure files reside (the figure names are appended to this
URL).

.TP
\fBremove_inline_comments\fR
Utility for removing all inline comments in Doconce documents.

.TP
\fBlatin2html\fR
Utility for substituting all latin-1 characters by their corresponding
HTML character codes.

.TP
\fBsphinx_dir\fR
Utility for autogenerating a Sphinx directory for realizing a Sphinx
version of a Doconce document. Takes the name of the Doconce file
as additional argument. The doconce format sphinx doconcefile command
should be run first.

.TP
\fBclean\fR
Remove all Doconce generated files and trash files. Place removed files
in generated subdir Trash.

.TP
\fBlatex_header\fR
Show LaTeX header.

.TP
\fBlatex_footer\fR
Show LaTeX footer.

.TP
\fBchange_encoding\fR
Change encoding in files.

.TP
\fBguess_encoding\fR
Guess encoding in a file.

.TP
\fBbbl2rst\fR
Very simple function for helping to covert a .bbl LaTeX file to reST
bibliography syntax. A much more complete solution converting bibtex to
reST is found in the bib2rst.py script in doconce/bin.

.TP
\fBsplit_rst\fR
Split a large .rst file into smaller files corresponding to each main
section (7= in headings).

.TP
\fBsphinxfix_local_URLs\fR

doconce sphinxfix_local_URLs file.rst

.TP
\fBgrab\fR

doconce grab \-\-from[\-] from-text [\-\-to[\-] to-text] somefile

Grab a portion of text from a file, starting with from-text (included if
specified as \-\-from, not included if specified via \-\-from\-) up to
the first occurence of to-text (\-\-to implies that the last line is
included, \-\-to\- excludes the last line). If \-\-to[\-] is not
specified, all text up to the end of the file is returned.

from-text and to-text are specified as regular expressions.

.TP
\fBspellcheck\fR

doconce spellcheck \-d .dict4spell.txt *.do.txt

Spellcheck files via ispell, but remove problematic parts from the files
first.

.TP
\fBlist_labels\fR

doconce list_labels doconcefile.do.txt | latexfile.tex

List all labels used in a doconce or latex file. Since labels often are
logically connected to headings in a document, the headings are printed
in between in the output from this function, with a comment sign # in
front so that such lines can easily be skipped when processing the
output.

The purpose of the function is to enable clean-up of labels in a
document. For example, one can add to the output a second column of
improved labels and then make replacements.

.TP
\fBteamod\fR

doconce teamod name

.TP
\fBassemble\fR

doconce assemble name master.do.txt

.SH BUGS
.TP
Send comments, questions, bug reports etc. to doconce@googlegroups.com.

.SH LICENSE
Doconce is licensed under the new BSD license.

.SH AUTHOR
Doconce is mainly written by Hans Petter Langtangen <hpl@simula.no>, with
contributions from Johannes H. Ring <johannr@simula.no>.
